once upon a time i thought intensity was
the answer i thought you know big
intense strides forwards was the answer
to changing your life and as i've as
i've managed to achieve more things in
my life it's become patently obvious
that it's the tiny little seemingly
insignificant decisions that i've made
that have compounded in my favor over
the space of five or ten years um and
not any individual decision and so i
would employ people to to try and get
the tiny tiniest things in their life
right and see that as a as a compounding
um a compounding tailwind
[Music]
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of impact theory i am here with stephen
bartlett steve and welcome to the show
thanks for having me tom it's a real
pleasure dude i'm excited for this one
so you are a crushingly successful
entrepreneur at a ridiculously young age
you built social chain from nothing to
being valued at half a billion dollars i
think um so pretty extraordinary
extraordinary at any age but at your age
it's really quite dizzying
given that context i want to start with
a quote from your new book happy sexy
millionaire and this really jumped out
of me i love this
you are not what happened to you you are
how you choose to handle it
now give people a little bit of
background that's easy to say when you
are you know worth millions and millions
of dollars but give people a little
background on where you started and the
context for that statement
so i was born in a village in africa in
botswana near this near south africa and
i came to the united kingdom when i was
about two years old and i was raised
five days a week by my mother who can't
read all right still to this day so even
up until the age of about 15 or 16 i was
trying to help her learn how to read by
using the bible um i went off to
university when i got kicked out of
school at 16 17 years old because i was
way too preoccupied with starting
businesses i was running the
vending machine deals that we had for
all of the vending machines in our
schools i was running all of the events
for the sixth form which was the top
level year at school so school trips i
was doing everything organizing the
venues doing collecting the money um
coming up with the idea marketing in it
and i got to the point where my
attendance in school was about 30
percent um and then they decided that
they would kick me out to make a
statement despite the fact i was making
the school a lot of money there was two
expulsion attempts the first was
rejected by the head of the school he
took the expulsion letter off me ripped
it up and said you're my little harry
potter we keep you under the stairs
because you made
money but then later near the end of
school they kicked me out and off i went
to university to study business went to
one lecture walked in looked around
everyone else was sleeping on the tables
and clearly didn't didn't want to be
there to study business in the same way
that i did so i walked out called my mom
told her i was dropping out of
university she said to me i'll never
speak to you again unless you go back to
university um and i decided that i was
going to do it anyway so i didn't speak
to my mum for
from that point onwards for the for the
next two or three years
i didn't have any money at this point
and when i say any money i mean i had
negative money so i i end up moving into
these very derelict houses in this place
called manchester and moss side
and you know at my lowest i was leaving
the house and rummaging through
takeaways looking for food that someone
had left i was stealing pizzas from
corner shops
it was a very dire time but i was
i was completely convinced that i was
going to be
a happy sexy millionaire before the age
of 25 and that's what inspired the title
of the book i wrote it in the first page
of my diary 18 years old after dropping
out i had four goals in life they were
to have a range over sport before i was
25 to become a millionaire to work on my
body image because i was very very
skinny and to get a girlfriend that's
what i thought happiness was so off i
went at 18 years old um and yeah started
a company started another company and
then we had a bit of success that that
is uh yeah putting it mildly so one of
the things in there that i found really
interesting is that
you were so embarrassed by your house
that had smashed up front windows a
bunch of refrigerators in the backyard
that you would actually have your
friends drop you off at a different
house
and then you would walk home and that if
i'm not mistaken you never had anybody
growing up over to your house so that to
me is
is very interesting given obviously the
trajectory of your life so i have a
hypothesis that
you don't have to have a wound to be
successful but it really helps
and there is something about
look poverty breaks most of the people
that it touches and so i'm not a
champion of poverty by any stretch of
the imagination but i want people who
right now are struggling who think
they're never going to make it to
recognize the gigantic chasm that you
had to cross in order to become
successful and
in the book you detail at great length
all the different pieces that you had to
pull together sort of beliefs way that
you move through the world what were
some of the key things that
and i know you're not a you've said that
i've always just had the belief i was
going to be successful so we won't waste
time with that one but what was it about
the way that you had to learn to move
whether it was first principles thinking
or whether it was recognizing that if it
is to be it is up to me like what what
got you
doing the right things that allowed you
to become successful
yeah i think i think you're you're
totally right there there's a quote in
the book where i say the things that
invalidated you when you're younger will
be the things you seek validation from
when you're older and for me
not being able to have
people at my house not being able to
celebrate birthdays and christmases
these they carved this insecurity into
me that as i get to 16 17 18 years old i
just want to fill and as you say like a
lot of successful people if you dig into
their stories you'll find this moment
this trauma this event that happened in
their early years and of course it's
then the thing that often makes them
successful
but
the reason they become successful is
because they're in some way unusual
right they might be obsessive about
money or power or control and that often
also comes with a unappreciated downside
which means they might find it really
hard to form relationships which i did
and they might be a little bit too
selfish they might be you know they
might chase after material things
thinking it's happiness get there it
moves away like a mirage and they're
left with a lack of fulfillment um to
answer your question about what the
things were in me that made me move
differently one of them was by the age
of 10 years old my parents were never in
the house and when i said i'll never i
mean like i would wake up they weren't
there and when i went to bed they
weren't there so at 10 years old i have
to fend for myself and you think think
about the pressures going on in my life
at that age i'm a kid who is feeling
like really inadequate and insecure
because i have nothing and my parents
aren't there so i'm looking around
thinking how can i fill this void so i'm
thinking i'm gonna do a deal with the
local vending machine company to stock
our school with vending machines and
we're going to get 20 of the revenue and
i'm going to take a little bit of a cut
and i'm going to organize all of the
events in my school and this was my way
of like i had independence and i had an
insecurity and when the two came
together i became this young kid who
just had no choice but to take on the
world um on his own and
and the other bit that you mentioned was
about belief because i think this is so
incredibly important
one of the things i hate about like
typical cliche poxy instagram advice is
people just say just believe in yourself
we all know that that's not how belief
works right like i i use the example in
the book if i held your dearest loved
one at gunpoint and said i'm gonna kill
them unless you believe that i am jesus
christ you could only lie to me because
you can't even if everything's on the
line you can't make yourself believe
something that you don't have evidence
to believe and so
the way the way that my belief built was
in that phase where i had radical
independence at 10 years old and i had
this huge insecurity and
it's like it's like building muscle in
the gym you just gradually build these
small case studies that compound on top
of each other but you know what i didn't
have lunch money today but i left the
house i did this i told this kid to buy
a ticket and now i have lunch money i
can influence my peers that's an
interesting new piece of evidence i've
got about myself and so it was those
three things it was building the case
studies it was just radical independence
and it was which which you know and this
insecurity that led me to yeah to being
a young person who had built a big
company yeah all right i want to get to
the case studies in a second but first i
want to know why you didn't get bitter
so as you know the child of a
an african immigrant and a british
father in a town where i think you said
1500 kids at your school and they were
all white except you
so there's and then on top of that the
crushing poverty the absence of the
parents like you had every reason to get
really pissed off
um
why didn't you
i got pissed off when i was i got i was
i felt very sorry for myself at the time
and it's one of the things that i feel
tremendously guilty for now as an adult
because
if you look at my situ so i this is the
crazy thing that i almost uncover while
i'm writing the book if you look at
where i came from in africa the village
in africa where i was born
and the
the standard of living there then you
take that same baby and you move him to
a better environment where he has this
house and he has
you know public education and he has
these things and he's miserable only
because the context changed and this is
one of the things that i uncover as i'm
going through the book is it's actually
like much of our um much of how we deem
the value of something is based on the
context we see it in and it's like when
you go to a restaurant they've done
these studies and they show that if
there's three stakes on the menu an
expensive one a medium price one and a
cheap one people go for the middle one
or the same with my you know i talk
about my nokia phone i used to have this
big nokia phone when i was younger it
was amazing
until you put it in a world full of
iphones and then suddenly you feel
inferior and it was really the contrast
of you know
seeing my neighbors that had nicer
gardens and nicer houses and they had
christmas presents that was making me
miserable and i've tried it as i've
gotten older to really free myself from
allowing contrast in comparison to be
um to allow me to determine my intrinsic
value
and this was one of the real ultimate
revelations i'd gone through life
believing this like societal lie that we
are intrinsically valued like
bartlett's value changes based on
what the people around me
are wearing or you know how they look or
how nice their hair is as if my
intrinsic value like there's a number
and it goes up and down and that was
that lie was was ultimately causing me a
lot of my misery so yeah
all right so
there there's obviously a lot in there
and i don't want to go too far afield
before we get back to these case studies
because i think that's so important
but
you talk about self-awareness you have a
great quote i don't remember the exact
quote off the top of my head but
basically you're never going to progress
unless you can develop the
self-awareness you're just not going to
learn the lessons
so
how like because the quote that i
started with to me that's the juice of
your story right is you get to the point
where you say okay
i can sort of reframe everything that's
happened to me in a way that disempowers
me or i can tell myself the same like
the same events but in a different sort
of story context and now i'm empowered
and i'm moving forward one when did you
become aware of that
and then how do you think about
self-narrative is it something that
you're shaping every day to make sure
what you choose to deal with the
situation you're in is always going to
move you to a better place
yeah so one of the
the decisions i think everyone has to
make
when they're trying to understand what
their true self narrative is or the
direction they should be moving in is
like what what actually intrinsically
matters to you and it's so difficult to
um to know these days what who you
actually are and what actually matters
to you especially if you're growing up
in my generation where you have you know
all of these screens and all of these
social networks telling you that being
tom bill you the entrepreneur is the
thing to do but also you need to be
traveling all the time and these
contrasting narratives and you kind of
lose yourself within that and so by
stripping away
a lot of the by understanding these
forces that had taken hold of me in my
life like in security and comparison i
was able to get closer to like listening
to that voice within me that was like
this is who we are um and now i try and
make my decisions on that basis which is
a real clear understanding of my
intrinsic values and i try and place my
time against those values so one of them
is my health at the moment i went from
being a really skinny guy to being in
the best shape of my life because i
started to understand that one of my
intrinsic values was to live a happy
healthy life um another point which i
wanted to touch on which is kind of
connected is it's very easy to get
caught up in the labels that you or
society have given you and these labels
can be black white poor dad mum social
media ceo
impact theory university host right it's
it's funny that we start to follow the
implicit instructions of those labels
and at one point when i left social
chain um in august
it was so incredibly tempting to go and
play out that those labels of being a
social media ceo for the next five ten
years of my life and i stopped again and
i said is that who i am am i those
labels or am i
something else and it was that
revelation for me that allowed me to
resist my labels as i call it and since
i left social chain and the obvious move
is obviously just to start another
company or a social media business i
started a theatrical production i'm
doing i'm working at a multi-billion
dollar biotech company solving mental
health disorders i'm djing now and i've
got a big show coming up and i'm trying
not to be confined by my
own self-narrative which i think will
actually lead me to a less fulfilling
life if that makes sense
all right so let's dive into the
self-narrative then so i would say
everyone is going to be confined by
their self-narrative but you can tell
yourself whatever narrative you want so
your narrative could be i can dj i can
work for a biomedical company i can
solve mental health crises um
or it can be man i am my last success
and that's it and [__] i better out do
what i just did and um
how how do you
work with that narrative is it conscious
are you journaling do you write it down
do you just you're obviously highly
verbal so is it that it's you're telling
your friends and sort of shaping it as
you go like how do you make sure that
whatever narrative you are telling is
expansive enough to not become the trap
it's it's a really good question um i
think my self-narrative is actually more
of a philosophy it's it's a set of
principles that i make or like a prism
in which i make my decisions through so
for example if someone comes up to me
and says um steve we've got this cancer
company in the biotech space do you want
to come and work there i don't sort of
use my my own self-narrative as a way to
decide whether that's the right
opportunity for me or the right
direction i ask myself i probably run
myself mentally through a certain set of
principles which is is it challenging
for me challenge is a really important
part of having that sort of feeling of
forward motion and challenge my life
keeps me stimulated and i talk about in
the book how i used to think chaos was
chaos and stability with stability now i
came to learn and from studying like
michael phelps when he
accomplished all of his goals and
reached apparent stability that in fact
stability
is chaos and chaos is stability so now i
i prioritize chaos in the form of
challenge i've heard you explain this so
i know what you mean but for somebody
that doesn't understand why you're
saying that stability is actually chaos
why is that true
so um
there was a day when i was 24 where
someone came along and offered me i
think it was 40 million to buy my
company and 18 year old insecure steve
bartlett showed up that day in my head
and he was like let's get that
lamborghini right and i went home that
day and i'm sat in a small dark room and
i go on auto trader which is the site
where you buy cars and i go on rightmove
at the same time i'm looking at this
amazing car this amazing house
and there's this weird sense of like
emptiness growing inside me that i'm
about to trade my like purpose for this
piece of metal and um i had like a mini
existential crisis which was
18 year old steve bartlett told us that
we came for this
but 25 year old steve bartlett looking
at it is thinking
but then what if it was all about a
lamborghini and this was the mountaintop
or the finish line and i'm feeling
totally unfulfilled by looking at my
completed goals
um
then i must have it all wrong and the
moment where i approached what i thought
stability was it felt like chaos it was
an existential crisis and in fact the
moments in my life where i've been
building something striving which you
would probably count as chaos those have
been when i've been most stable
and so that's why i've made this sort of
distinction between the two and i've
swapped them now so i look for chaos i
think it's a it's a non-negotiable in
any in my sort of decision-making prism
i look for um
a challenge that i'll find intrinsically
fulfilling um
you know in line with my interests or
because it's gonna change the world in
some way and that's probably the third
point which i talk a lot about in the
book is people who do careers that have
an impact on others um have the most
fulfilling careers it's no surprise that
clergy you know priests um um and people
like uh teachers report to having the
most fulfilling careers you know they
say that the best way to lift yourself
up is by reaching down and pulling
someone else up and again that's proven
to be incredibly true in my life
yeah
no that makes a lot of sense i actually
i really resonated with that flip of
um
when you
lose sight of where you're trying to go
you no longer have that clear objective
there's no purpose to what you're doing
there's a sense of being unmoored like
you're just
you're adrift and that feeling is deeply
uncomfortable one of the most
interesting stories in your book dude
this is so true
and i want people to know how true this
is that
when you were scrounging in the
restaurant cushions like the seats and
you found your 13 pound 40
and you said you were more excited in
that moment than when you realized that
you were worth tens of millions of
dollars
yeah tell people that moment and
what you realized then
so so one of the days where i was
exceptionally poor and i'd gone into
this this chicken shop looking for um
some food that someone had left and i
remember sitting on the backs of this
chair and i just i dropped some of like
20 pence down the back of this chair and
i put my hands down there it's filthy
and i reach down and i find these this
this big coin and i pull out it's a
pound coin and i'm like oh my god and
i'm there for like 10 minutes going down
my hands are full of money although
they're filthy and i went around all of
the chairs in this little chicken shop
and and managed to find about 13 pounds
and 40 pence yeah and um i was that day
i was it was just like i'd won the
lottery it was like euphoria and i
thought i can eat for probably for the
next two weeks now with this money and
then contrasting that to the day when
i'm sat in my hotel room in manchester
and i get the news that social chain is
now listed on the stock market and i can
see it um i can see the ticker symbol
and i can see the valuation at the time
was like 250 million dollars
and i felt
i would say num but it's less than num
it's like a negative version of num like
that's totally anti-climactical
um and the the
the confusion that comes about when you
don't feel the way you expect expected
to feel in those moments can be quite
confounding and i
i called my business partner dom and i
said you know he's my age and we did
this all together i said you know hoping
that he would give me the energy and the
positivity that i was seeking and i
called him and he was worse than me he
was more down than i was and again it
doesn't make sense it doesn't make sense
because 18 year old steve told me he
made me a promise that when we become a
sexy millionaire then we we get
everything we get the marching band the
confetti we get you know i don't know
something goes up i don't know so and it
didn't happen and i i felt really down
that day because of the anticlimax and
it wasn't until i left the the hotel
room and i thought i'll walk to work
today which i never did i put my music
on
i'm walking down the street and the
money trees by kendrick lamar comes on
and it was the song i used to listen to
when i lived in the gun crime part of
the city and i was doing a two-hour walk
at night time to go work in a call
center and
it was the song i used to dream about
being here today um while i was
listening to and i was looking around
the streets and suddenly all of the
memories of that time when i was 19 and
i was struggling came back to me that
was the apartment block i used to
fantasize about living in that was the
car dealership that i used to say to
myself one day we'll get one of those
and tears just come down my face but
again it was a moment of real deep
gratitude that was brought about because
of contrast i got to walk in 19 year old
steve's shoes that day on the way to
work listening to the music he used to
listen to
walking past the the shops that used to
create his dreams and i was just
overcome with gratitude and i couldn't
have been happier and so i called dom
back my business partner and took him
through that journey with me too and i
used to i basically took a trip down
memory lane with him and he felt the
same way
and i that day i learned a lot about the
concept of gratitude and
and also one actually one of the
downsides of living in forward motion is
you never get
it's so gradual the climb it's one step
at a time so there's it's hard to find a
moment where you go oh my god we've done
a thousand steps because yesterday was
just one more step than today so there
isn't that big moment um and your brain
doesn't especially when you're an
entrepreneur that's always a little bit
paranoid and and slightly scared of
being complacent
there isn't a moment where you stop and
say well oh my god look at what we've
done it just doesn't happen
so yeah that's what you know
but i learned a lot that day and i since
then to be honest i've since about 25 26
years old i've had a bit of a sort of an
existential journey trying to figure out
what life was all about you're you're
very good at synthesizing insights which
is incredibly powerful and now one of
those things i'm hoping you can
articulate for people is how
when you feel like a loser when you have
nothing going for you how do you begin
to build those case studies so that you
can begin to believe that the things
that you're you know dreaming about can
actually be possible for you
you know what i'm knocking around on
this topic so much at the moment because
i'm trying to understand the amount of
sort of self-responsibility
and um personal discipline is required
to start this journey i've got this
friend back home who was was my best
friend for my whole childhood up until
the age of 16. same street same school
hang around with each other every day
i've gone on to where i've gone to he is
still living there
um he is marginally suicidal he is on
government support and we've gone in two
completely different directions and i've
always tried to understand you know just
by all the help and effort that i've
tried to give him i've offered to pay
for his accommodation i've offered to
help him get a job nothing i've been
able to do has been able to move him
whereas we can all think of people in
our lives that just required a little
bit of support and they they went and
they transformed themselves and so i
reflect and i say okay so how would you
go if you if you are someone who is down
and out how do you go about making those
steps you know
part of the issue when we're thinking
about making radical change in our lives
is we see it as
being stood at the foot of like mount
everest a huge mountain we want to chain
completely change our life
but as is the case in my life and
probably yours
for me it starts with like first picking
up the smallest pebble whatever that is
and i've seen this time and time again
with my podcast guests as well he went
down and out my last guest on the
podcast was a guy that was suicidal had
just left his house to go and kill
himself he couldn't bring himself to do
it comes home and he watches a youtube
video just an advert that popped up and
it showed him these military commandos
and that just gave him a sense of
something it gave him a sense of fire
here so that day he put on his shorts
and he said you know what i'm gonna what
i'm gonna do today is gonna put on my
shorts and i'm just gonna go for a run
and it was that run which ultimately led
to another run and another run and it
changed his life he became an elite
military commando he's now like a
mindset coach and he's now you know
absolutely dominating the world
sometimes it requires a spark and that
spark
um for me or for a lot of people is
understanding that
there is something worth
taking the first step for and for me in
terms of like the practical way you
start to build those case studies it
literally is
it can be the smallest thing it can be
deciding the name of the business you it
can be getting out of bed at 7 00 pm uh
7am that day it can be the smallest
thing and when you start to look at it
like small tiny decisions compounding in
your favor versus having to climb
everest i think then it becomes a little
bit more mentally achievable
than uh then a lot of sort of instagram
hustle porn stars might want to make you
believe
and i think yeah that's that's
once upon a time i thought intensity was
the answer i thought you know
big strides for big intense strides
forwards was the answer to changing your
life and as i've as i've managed to
achieve more things in my life it's
become patently obvious that it's the
tiny little seemingly insignificant
decisions that i've made that have
compounded in my favor over the space of
five or ten years
and not any individual decision
and so
yeah i would employ people to to try and
get the tiny tiniest things in their
life right and see that as a
compounding tailwind all right so
uh you said that
every every self-help book ever written
should be titled be consistent for a
really long time
yeah and i thought that was
so on the money why is that um
how more importantly
how
does one know what to be consistent on
in order to have the the big impact
i i tend to actually believe that you
don't have a huge amount of choice now
that sounds like a crazy thing to say
but i think life has a really remarkable
way of
making you inconsistent at things that
you absolutely intrinsically absolutely
hate doing um the thing do you see what
i mean like the things that i've become
most successful at i got some type of
like intrinsic payoff from just like a
little token one token a day and that
was one of the most important factors
that allowed me to be consistent
the thought of having to be consistent
at something that you intrinsic
intrinsically hate doing that offers you
no return um i find uh like i just i
don't think that's possible it's why i
dropped out of university it's why i
couldn't pay attention in school
um why is consistency so important i
just think i just think it's everything
i think if you understand the laws of
compounding returns
um and you've read the book the slight
edge by
i'm gonna say jeff olsen you'll probably
know you've read every book ever um
you'll understand again as i said like
it's the small seemingly insignificant
things that are compounding for or
against us in every aspect of our life
whether we know it or not the old
analogy of you know if i eat a cookie
today i won't be fat if i eat a cookie
tomorrow i won't be fat if i eat a
cookie every single day for the next
five years i will be fat and you look at
you know the way that great things
happen the grand canyon i think i talk
about in the book if you got a hundred
million gallons of water and dropped it
on a mountain there would be no impact
it wouldn't change shape but if you get
a trickle of water and you trickle it
through the mountain for 10 years you'll
have a grand canyon like that's that's
how you move um huge objects and achieve
great things it's that showing up every
single day and
one the other way that i learned it and
specifically how when you focus on
consistency things go really slow and
then fast was my instagram following um
it took me
800 posts to get 10 000 followers in my
next 800 posts i got 1.1 million
additional followers in fact
i got 10 uh i got 300 000 followers in
my lot in 10 posts
yeah so i when the whole carousel thing
blew up i got 300 000 followers by just
doing 10 carousels and i thought to
myself you know i've been doing this
instagram thing for eight years
and and if you looked at the graph of
how my instagram is gone it's exactly
like every compounding interest graph
ever if you look at my health if you
look at my brushing my teeth if you look
at anything my business it's exactly the
same um
and that just requires consistency and i
think it's so liberating to say that
because again people think that
performing radical change in your life
is some like
you know
pythagoras um
quantum physics equation that they've
got to solve to move this mountain but
it's not it's the one thing you can
control is your time you can see it as i
get 24 chips every single day i'm stood
in front of this roulette table my job
is to place as many of these chips on
things that are in line with my values
because then at the end of the day the
roulette wheel spins and you see what
returns you made and so every single day
i just think about my 24 chips and where
i'm going to place them today and all
those decisions in line with my values
um
and that's a that's how i if i want to
try and simplify my thinking to that
level it becomes it feels really
achievable and manageable you know when
i think about trying to change my life
it's daunting and terrifying but placing
my 24 chips better every single day 16
by the time i've woken up
it feels like something that i can
achieve you know so
all right so how do you pick where you
put the chips
john there's two questions i ask myself
the the first question is um
the person i want to be how would they
place their chips another way of asking
that is like you know how would the
person i want to be use their time and i
find that as a re a really useful
distilling question to ask myself
because sometimes you don't know what
the right thing to do is but you know
the person you want to be you know you i
feel like we all have an idea of how
they behave and so i can ask myself even
when i'm about to consume you know like
a big mcdonald's burger would the person
i want to be make this decision and for
some reason that feels like an easier
question to answer than is it right
right now because
our present self as as we all know
um tends to lean towards seeking comfort
and tends and likes to avoid discomfort
whether psychological or physical i
think i wrote on twitter the other day
um
comfort is like a short is is a
i can't remember my own bloody quote now
basically like comfort is a short time
frame but a long-term enemy like so in
the moment i'm continually not making
maybe the best decisions but um
yeah in the long term that comfort will
will stab me in the back whether that's
my health my fitness or my my intrinsic
joy so that's really the most important
question i ask myself when i'm thinking
about placing my chips and then it's
just a case of what my values that's the
other question so
am i clear on my values do i want to be
as you'd say a better husband or do i
want to be a better uncle to my niece do
i want to have a greater impact on the
world of mental health or change the
education system is my book important to
me is that more important than it to me
than watching netflix for four hours and
that again is a really useful prism
which is my clear intrinsic values of
knowing where to place my chips it
sounds like nonsense it's actually
really simple and i think that's as i
say is liberating totally agree that uh
you are liberated once you know sort of
what the rubric is by which you're going
to evaluate an opportunity like you have
that filter uh it's very powerful in the
book you actually include one of your
decision making rubrics around quitting
and you said something that i found very
um
useful it is a very unique frame which
is quitting is a skill
so
you recently left social chain which had
to anybody else would look at that and
say that is a staggeringly large
decision most people would be trapped
they'd never leave and in the book you
just say here's my matrix it essentially
forces a decision
walk people through how to think about
quitting
yeah so starts with like the question
are you thinking of quitting if the
answer is no obviously you're in the
wrong frame if the answer is yes it asks
you why you're thinking about quitting
um
are you thinking about quitting because
it's hard are you thinking about
quitting because it sucks and what i
mean by sucks as i define it is like
um it's like toxic for your mental
health fulfillment intrinsic values
right so it sucks to find that however
you will if i'm thinking of quitting
because it's hard
right which is the other side of the
framework i'll then say okay well are
the rewards on offer
um
do they justify how hard this challenge
is right the potential rewards and offer
and if the answer is yes then i'll carry
on because i don't think we should quit
things um purely because they're hard
especially if the rewards on offer are
equivocal to the challenge and
in fact as you'll know and as everyone i
think will know my hardest moments in
life have been my most valuable so
moving to the other side of the spectrum
if well if it if the answer is no there
and the rewards on offer aren't worth
how hard it is then i'll quit so if i'm
struggling but at the end of that
struggle is one dollar bill then again
this is this is probably a pointless
effort moving to the other side of the
framework so it sucks the first question
if it sucks whatever you're doing in
your life a relationship a job whatever
ask yourself if
[Music]
if you believe you can make it not suck
right if you believe there's something
you can do to make that situation not
suck and then if you say yes you've got
to ask yourself are the rewards on offer
worth the effort it will take to make it
not suck and that could be a toxic boss
at work you know or whatever and you
think well you know i actually it would
take so much effort
maybe to the point of impossibility to
get that person out of my life or to
remove that barrier that it's not worth
it anymore and then going down that side
of the framework as well
so if if it sucks and you believe you
can change it and it's worth changing
then again you stick at it and that in
simple is my quitting framework it
really it's quite simplified and
everything has tremendous nuance and
we've all got bills to pay so things
aren't always that simple but that's
kind of the prisoner and that's why
i've been at total peace at times when
other people have thought my quitting
decisions were courageous or dumb or
terrifying it just doesn't seem to be a
decision to me and that's where i got to
the social chain where
um
it sucked and the rewards on offer
weren't worth it weren't worth how much
it sucked anymore and i didn't think i
could change it so i was um i was gone
and what changed fundamentally was it
something in the business or was it
something in you
when you start a company at 21 years old
and you dilute yourself tremendously um
you also lose a lot of control and um
as you'll read about in the book again
but also as most sort of psychologists
have determined when they're trying to
understand why people love their work
control is a huge huge part of
motivation feeling like you have
autonomy what we call self-determination
of your work is tremendous and i diluted
myself but then there was you know eight
boards of direct you know eight people
on the board of directors who were
double my age living in another country
all living in the same country and i
just felt like i didn't have the control
i needed anymore to take this company in
the direction i wanted to so for me the
decision was to step out of that and
it's i almost see it like you reach a
ceiling and you've got to like turn
right to carry on going up and that was
my decision it was
this is giving me everything it can and
now i move on and we you know i take
with me the thing that got me here so
nothing lost
all right so obviously i'm pretty sure i
know what it is uh but what is the thing
that got you here that you're taking
with you
it's a perspective on the world i think
um it's a the way that i see the world
and that first principle thinking which
you alluded to at the start of the
conversation being able to look at a
situation and um hold it out in front of
you and question
if if this is still the correct answer
to the problems that we have ahead of us
so
you know if you look at my decision to
drop out of university i was a business
student that sat in the room looked
around and thought i'm going to get the
same piece of paper as her and she's
drunk and asleep and she definitely
doesn't want to be here so is this a
piece of paper of value this degree
probably and if i'm going to be an
entrepreneur this is all first principle
thinking if i'm going to be an
entrepreneur and run my business who am
i going to show this piece of paper to
anyway what am i actually going to need
to become the entrepreneur i'm probably
going to need experience
and i'm sat here listening to this guy
who's never ran a business before trying
to tell me to think he was trying to he
was trying to tell us to make posters
with like felt it pens and this is all
not so like first principle thinking and
and then you're spending huge sums of
money to indebt yourself for this
worthless piece of paper first
principles very simple first principles
will tell you that this is a very bad
idea so that's first principle thinking
um
self-belief you can't take that from me
in fact it only compounds in one
direction really
um i guess it could
massive failure might shake that but my
self-belief
and now you know there's five buckets
that i've spent the last and this is
really a point for young people that are
listening to this if they're thinking
you know before the age of 30 what
should i be
doing i kind of see
there's five buckets that we all should
be doing everything we can to fill the
first is like your network right so it's
like who you know the contacts you have
which proves to be incredibly valuable
the second is your knowledge which is
what you know you like knowledge and
skills um i'll see your knowledge and
then i'll say the third one is actually
your skills so knowledge and skills
knowledge for me is the information i
have the skills kind of relate to my
ability to
apply that those skills public speaking
sales that kind of thing
the fourth is your res resources so
money thing you know money you have your
disposal and the fifth is your
reputation
right which is again proves to be
incredibly valuable a lot of people call
it personal brand now but your
reputation is you know it shows up when
you when you need it to most so what i'm
think when i when i say to young people
a lot of the time i'm like if you're
below the age of 25 and you're trying to
optimize your future remember you're
pouring into those five buckets at all
times and to put yourselves in positions
whether that's taking a shitty sales job
working on the phones but you can you
know optimize and increase those those
five buckets
and yeah those are the five things i
took with me as well my reputation my
skills my knowledge my network and my
resources that is a way better answer
with far more detail than i was
expecting my friend that is very
impressive
tell me what do you want people to get
out of your book
i see it as kind of like an intervention
right so i
i represent a certain generation the
connected generation that were connected
to the internet from you know
from my very early adolescence and we've
all gone through a very similar
experience um
i think my experience is probably
slightly exacerbated in some areas
because i grew up with social media and
uh with just this you know
it's almost like
i grew up in a much bigger room where i
could see much more people and contrast
myself to them and these forces
including some of the the more specific
personal forces about being a black kid
in an all-white school the only kid with
curly hair being uh you know a broke kid
in a middle class area all of these
forces exacerbated it for me but i think
the principles are fundamentally the
same for for the vast majority of our
generation in fact the data says it is
if you look at
um cosmetic surgery and and the way that
our generation in particular are going
under the knife to change their body
more so than anything now because of the
like the kardashians of the world and
things like that i know that my like i
know that the majority of my generation
are going in
a certain direction and i also think
we've not yet seen the true extent of
the results of this experiment we've
done but we decided to give everybody
this piece of glass in their hand where
they could see a bunch of fake things
and they would be
reinforced um
psychologically with likes and followers
based on how they behaved and would say
that was good that was bad we don't do
that again and look she's really good
you know and we had like superficiality
and materialism ground into our
character i don't think we've yet seen
the the
results of this experiment um so before
we see the results of this experiment
fully transpire in our mental health and
our happiness as we're seeing now with
this like mental health epidemic
i think i have a chance as someone who's
like climbed up the ladder that i
that 18 year old steve wanted to get up
to to like look back down and shout no
no no no no no don't come up this
[__] lap
do you know what i mean but i hate the
cliche of like oh money doesn't buy you
happiness like i'm not giving up my
[__] money shouldn't i mean i don't
know about you but i prefer it having
money and it's a good thing but um
but i was just wrong about everything
and i i i
you know my publisher asked me for years
to write a book and i was like i've got
nothing to say and then it was it was
the day where i looked back at my diary
from 18 years old and in the front page
it says like before i'm 25 i want to be
a happy sexy millionaire and it lists it
i thought
how am i encouraging more 18 year old
steve bartlett's right now to follow in
that same path and and um
and what can i do what what would i want
to write for 18 year old steve who was
insecure who was growing up in this
connected world he was chasing pleasure
thinking it was happiness as it moved
off into the distance every time i
thought i grabbed it like a rainbow or a
mirage
um and that was that was it i thought
you know i i have a chance for my
generation to write a bit of an
intervention and hopefully and i'm not
even sure if it's possible if i'm honest
with you
to get them to realize something about
the true nature of like fulfillment
about love and about success without
them having to make the same mistakes
that i did because i've got a friend and
i've got many friends who have become
wildly successful
and still haven't figured it out
so you know and then
and then some people will spend their
whole lives chasing it the thing that i
managed to get
um never get it
but get everything get all of the
adverse consequences of the chase which
is like shitty mental health isolation
loneliness um depression anxiety
and so this was my intervention and
that's what it says across the back of
the book it says this is my intervention
for a generation that i think are have
more information than ever before but
are seemingly less informed and
and uh yeah and that was
that was it
well i think you nailed it man
the book is great very well done
where can people connect with you
anywhere my uh anywhere to be honest you
know it's just social media i guess
to get to instagram my name's stephen on
instagram um yeah that's probably the
best place to find me um and you can get
the book on amazon you know if you're in
america or anywhere else yeah
perfect
thank you so much by the way honestly
you're such a
an inspiration and i really really
respect
your values they really come through in
everything you do more so than and i've
met a lot of people in this game a lot
of people on instagram a lot of people
that are producing content there are
almost none with the level of like
authentic values that you have and i've
met you in person i've met you online
and i've met you now again and it really
stands out and you can really tell when
someone is real you know what i mean and
you are one of those very very i'll be
honest rare real people so thank you for
that because you've helped guide me in a
way that i've known is without
a gender if you know what i mean so
thank you man
i really appreciate that that means a
lot and it comes from a place of having
been a total mess and figuring it out
along the way and realizing i actually
get anxious when i try to be cool so
if i didn't i would be a poser like
everybody else but sadly
i get way too anxious so but thank you
man no i really appreciate that and uh
to everybody watching guys trust me this
dude like one you're going to want to
listen to the interviews that he's done
is extraordinary he has his own podcast
which is also fantastic and the book is
amazing it will change your life if you
let it and that is the highest praise
that i can pay it speaking of things
that will change your life if you let it
if you haven't already be sure to
subscribe and until next time my friends
be legendary take care
the hardest thing to do is to is to
enable people to see themselves as they
are
not as they hoped they were
not as they've been taught they are but
as they actually are
it's the single hardest thing to do and
i'll tell you why
because we're all embedded in this
construct of a thing called identity